HTML dialog element (#29195)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/html/element/dialog/index.md

- The CSS {{cssxref('::backdrop')}} pseudo-element can be used to style the backdrop of a modal dialog, which is displayed behind the `<dialog>` element when the dialog is displayed using the {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.showModal()")}} method. For example, you can use this pseudo-element to obfuscate the inert content behind the modal dialog.
- The [`autofocus`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/autofocus) attribute should be added to the element with which the user is expected to interact immediately on opening a modal dialog. If there is no element involving immediate interaction, the `autofocus` attribute can be added to the `<dialog>` element itself.

## Examples

> ### HTML-only example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Caveats of creating a non-modal dialog using only HTML
```

> **Note:** Non-modal `<dialog>`s can be toggled open and closed by toggling the presence of the `open` attribute, but this is not recommended.

## Usage notes

- {{HTMLElement("form")}} elements can close a `<dialog>` if they have the attribute `method="dialog"` or if the button used to submit the form has `formmethod="dialog"` set. In this case, the `<dialog>` closes, the states of the form controls are saved, not submitted, and the {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.returnValue", "returnValue")}} property gets set to the `value` of the button that was used to save the form's state.
- The {{cssxref('::backdrop')}} CSS pseudo-element can be used to style modal dialog's backdrop, which is displayed behind a `<dialog>` element when a dialog is displayed with {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.showModal()")}}. For example, to dim unreachable content behind the modal dialog.
- The `autofocus` attribute should be added on the element that the user will expect to immediately interact with when a modal dialog opens, or the `<dialog>` element itself if there is no such element.

## Examples

> ### HTML-only example

Author: There are issues with HTML-only examples. This example is "not advised".  An HTML-only dialog must be loaded open and once closed, can not be re-opened (that requires JS), so want a non-promotional header.

> ### HTML-only example

Reviewer: Makes sense. I'll make a suggestion to reflect this through the title.

#### CSS

We can style the {{cssxref('::backdrop')}}.

```css
::backdrop {
  image: linear-gradient(45deg, magenta, rebeccapurple, dodgerblue, green);
  opacity: 0.75;
}
```

#### JavaScript

The dialog is opened modally with the `.showModal()` method and closed with the `.close()` method.

```js
const dialog = document.querySelector("dialog");
const showButton = document.querySelector("dialog + button");
const closeButton = document.querySelector("dialog button");

// "Show the dialog" button opens the <dialog> modally
showButton.addEventListener("click", () => {
  dialog.showModal();
});

// "Close" button close the <dialog>
closeButton.addEventListener("click", () => {
  dialog.close();
});
```

#### Result

{{EmbedLiveSample("Modal_example", "100%", 200)}}

When a modal dialog is opened, it is opened over the top of any other dialogs that might be present. Everything outside the modal dialog are inert with interactions outside the dialog being blocked. You'll note when the dialog is opened, With the exception of the dialog, interacting with the document is not possible; the "Show the dialog" button is mostly obfuscated by the almost opaque backdrop and is inert.

> ### Return value example

Reviewer: Something like this?

```suggestion
### Handling the return value from the dialog
```

> TThe value of the submitting button whose activation submits a form within a dialog is the [`returnValue`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLDialogElement/returnValue) of the dialog.
> 
> This example opens a modal dialog when the "Show the dialog" button is activated. The dialog contains a form with a {{HTMLElement("select")}} and two {{HTMLElement("button")}} elements which default to `type="submit"`. An eventlistener updates the value of the "confirm" button when the `<select>` changes. This is the return value. If the dialog is closed with the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key, there is no return value.
> 
> When the dialog is closed, the return value is displayed under the "Show the dialog" button.

Reviewer: - Can we start the description with something like "This example demonstrates how to..."

```suggestion
This example demonstrates how to open a modal dialog by using a form. The value of the button that submits the form within the `<dialog>` element is the [`returnValue`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLDialogElement/returnValue) of the dialog.

This example opens a modal dialog when the "Show the dialog" button is activated. The dialog contains a form with a {{HTMLElement("select")}} and two {{HTMLElement("button")}} elements, which default to `type="submit"`. An eventlistener updates the value of the "Confirm" button when the select option changes. This is the return value. If the dialog is closed by pressing the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key, there is no return value.

When the dialog is closed, the return value is displayed under the "Show the dialog" button.
```

> {{EmbedLiveSample("Advanced_example", "100%", 300)}}

Reviewer: I can't preview and test the example because it is pointing to the previous section
```suggestion
{{EmbedLiveSample("Handling the return value from the dialog", "100%", 300)}}
```
..or whatever the example title is updated to

> This example demonstrated three methods of closing modal dialogs; this dialog can be closed via an in-dialog form submitted using the `dialog` methode methods, as we also saw in the [HTML-only example](#html-only-example). This dialog can also be closed with the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key and via the {domxref("HTMLDialogElement.close()")}} method, also demonstrated in the [modal example](#modal-example). In this example, the "Cancel" button closes the dialog via the `dialog` form method and the "Confirm" closes the dialog via the {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.close()")}} method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates the following three methods of closing modal dialogs:
- By submitting the form within the dialog form using the `dialog` method (as seen in the [HTML-only example](#creating_an_html-only_modeless_dialog)).
- By pressing the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key.
- By calling the {domxref("HTMLDialogElement.close()")}} method (as seen in the [modal example](#creating_a_modal_dialog).
In this example, the "Cancel" button closes the dialog via the `dialog` form method and the "Confirm" button closes the dialog via the {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.close()")}} method.
```

> The "Cancel" button includes a [`formmethod="dialog"`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input/submit#formmethod), which overrides the {{HTMLElement("form")}}'s default {{HTTPMethod("GET")}} [`method`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form#method). When a form's method is [`dialog`](#usage_notes), the state of the form is saved, not submitted, and the dialog gets closed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "Cancel" button includes the [`formmethod="dialog"`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input/submit#formmethod) attribute, which overrides the {{HTMLElement("form")}}'s default {{HTTPMethod("GET")}} [`method`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form#method). When a form's method is [`dialog`](#usage_notes), the state of the form is saved but not submitted, and the dialog gets closed.
```

  </tbody>
</table>

## Accessibility considerations

> While dialogs can be created using other elements, the native `<dialog>` element provides usability and accessibility features that must be replicated if using other elements for a similar purpose. If creating a custom dialog implementation, ensure all expected default behaviors are supported and proper labeling recommendations are followed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While dialogs can be created using other elements, the native `<dialog>` element provides usability and accessibility features that must be replicated if you use other elements for a similar purpose. If you're creating a custom dialog implementation, ensure that all expected default behaviors are supported and proper labeling recommendations are followed.
```

> When implementing a dialog, it is important to consider the most appropriate place to set user focus. When using {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.showModal()")}} to open a `<dialog>`, focus is set on the first nested focusable element. Explicitly indicating the initial focus placement by use of the [autofocus](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/autofocus) attribute will help ensure initial focus is set to the element deemed the best initial focus placement for any particular dialog. When in doubt, as it may not always be known where initial focus could be set within a dialog, particularly for instances where a dialog's content is dynamically rendered when invoked, the `<dialog>` element itself may provide the best initial focus placement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When implementing a dialog, it is important to consider the most appropriate place to set user focus. When using {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement.showModal()")}} to open a `<dialog>`, focus is set on the first nested focusable element. Explicitly indicating the initial focus placement by using the [`autofocus`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/autofocus) attribute will help ensure initial focus is set on the element deemed the best initial focus placement for any particular dialog. When in doubt, as it may not always be known where initial focus could be set within a dialog, particularly for instances where a dialog's content is dynamically rendered when invoked, the `<dialog>` element itself may provide the best initial focus placement.
```

> Ensure a mechanism is provided to allow users to close a dialog. The most robust way to ensure all users can close a dialog is to include an explicit button to do so, sucha as a confirmation, cancel or close button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure a mechanism is provided to allow users to close the dialog. The most robust way to ensure that all users can close the dialog is to include an explicit button to do so, such as a confirmation, cancellation, or close button.
```

> By default, a `<dialog>` invoked by the `showModal()` method will allow for its dismissal by the <kbd>Escape</kbd>. A non-modal dialog does not dismiss via the <kbd>Escape</kbd> key by default, and depending on what the non-modal dialog represents, it may not be desired for this behavior. Keyboard users expect the <kbd>Escape</kbd> key to close modal dialogs; ensure this behavior is implemented and maintained. If multiple modal dialogs are open, <kbd>Escape</kbd> should only close the last shown dialog. When using `<dialog>`, this behavior is provided by the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, a dialog invoked by the `showModal()` method can be dismissed by pressing the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key. A non-modal dialog does not dismiss via the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key by default, and depending on what the non-modal dialog represents, it may not be desired for this behavior. Keyboard users expect the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key to close modal dialogs; ensure that this behavior is implemented and maintained. If multiple modal dialogs are open, pressing the <kbd>Esc</kbd> key should close only the last shown dialog. When using `<dialog>`, this behavior is provided by the browser.
```

> The `<dialog>` element is exposed by browsers similarly to custom dialogs using the ARIA [role="dialog"](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/dialog_role) attribute. `<dialog>` elements invoked by the `showModal()` method will have an implicit [aria-modal="true"](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-modal), whereas `<dialog>` elements invoked by the `show()` method, or rendered by use of the `open` attribute or changing the default `display` of a `<dialog>` will be exposed as `[aria-modal="false"]`. When implementing modal dialogs, everything other than the `<dialog>` and its contents should be rendered inert using the [`inert`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/inert) attribute. When using `<dialog>` along with the `HTMLDialogElement.showModal()` method, this behavior is provided by the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `<dialog>` element is exposed by browsers in a a manner similar to custom dialogs that use the ARIA [role="dialog"](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/dialog_role) attribute. `<dialog>` elements invoked by the `showModal()` method implicitly have [aria-modal="true"](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-modal), whereas `<dialog>` elements invoked by the `show()` method or displayed using the `open` attribute or by changing the default `display` of a `<dialog>` are exposed as `[aria-modal="false"]`. When implementing modal dialogs, everything other than the `<dialog>` and its contents should be rendered inert using the [`inert`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/inert) attribute. When using `<dialog>` along with the `HTMLDialogElement.showModal()` method, this behavior is provided by the browser.
```

- The {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement/cancel_event", "cancel")}} event

> - [HTML forms guide](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms).
> - The {{cssxref("::backdrop")}} pseudo-element

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Web forms](/en-US/docs/Learn/Forms) in the Learn area
```

## See also

> - The {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement/")}} Interface
> - The {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement/close_event", "close")}} event
> - The {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement/cancel_event", "cancel")}} event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement")}} interface
- {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement/close_event", "close")}} event
- {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement/cancel_event", "cancel")}} event
```

> - The {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement/open", "open")}} property
> - The {{CSSXref("::backdrop")}} pseudo-element
> - The [`inert`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/inert) attribute

Reviewer: - We can drop the "The"s
- Maybe we can qualify the property and attribute
- Also changing the order to group technologies
```suggestion
- {{domxref("HTMLDialogElement/open", "open")}} property of the `HTMLDialogElement` interface
- [`inert`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/inert) global attribute for HTML elements
- {{CSSXref("::backdrop")}} CSS pseudo-element
```
